So in this segment I want to talk a little
bit about thinking about causality.
So in any introductory level statistics
course one of the important things that
you learn is to chant correlation is not
causation, correlation is not causation.
It's some sort of
semi-religious incantation.
It's particularly important when
we think about people analytics.
Why is this so important?
When we do people analytics,
it's because we're thinking
of changing something, right?
It's because we're thinking there's
something we could do differently.
So to take some of the topics
we've been talking about.
I talked about different ways
in which you can staff jobs.
Suppose we had found that people who move
jobs through formal posting do worse.
Well, then should we be thinking
about discouraging that posting and
doing more sponsorship?
Suppose as we analyze performance,
we find that people who have
been the longest in the job
tend to be lower performers.
Does that mean we should be moving
people around their jobs more so
they don't get stale?
Suppose we find that people who have
taken a training program perform better,
well, should we invest more in
training and train more people?
Or even if we find that they have people
who have done a training program,
their performance improves more.
Again, does that suggest
this training program works?
Maybe, but we want to make sure that
other things aren't happening instead.
There are really two types of problems
that we want to be very careful about.
So one of them is what we call
an omitted variable problem,
an omitted variable bias.
So we find that X is associated with Y.
So, when people have moved
jobs through posting,
which is X, they're more likely
to perform higher, which is Y.
Does that mean that X causes Y?
Maybe, but it could also means
there's some third variable,
here O, that is driving both X and Y.
So I talked about maybe if
we found that posting jobs
was associated with lower performance,
we should do less posting.
Well, an alternative explanation is
that the reason that we post jobs
is because they're difficult to fill.
We don't have people currently who could
do that job that we can identify, so
we post it to see if
there's anybody out there.
Well jobs that we don't have people
we can do are probably gonna end up
being performed worse.
And so it might not be that
the posting's causing the problem, but
rather the thing that's causing us
to post is causing the problem.
The other thing I talked about is,
maybe we find people improve
performance after training?
Seems like good evidence that
training improves performance.
But in the literature on wages and
training,
there's this really interesting
phenomenon called the Ashenfelter Dip.
Somebody discovered that actually
people's wages tend to dip
before they enter training,
because why do people enter training?
Because they feel they need to improve.
When they increase afterwards, part of
that is just a reversion to the mean.
People having temporary problems,
those tend to go away.
It's also when they have training.
You can imagine the same
thing in your organization.
People have a bad quarter, they get sent
to training, well that bad quarter was
a bunch of things,
the next quarter's gonna be better, okay?
It looks like the training's caused
performance, but really it's that
bad quarter that's causing both
the fact they go to training and
the fact that their performance
looks better next quarter.
The other big kind of
problem is reverse causality.
So rather than X causing Y, Y causes X.
So good performers,
the fact that people are performing well
causes them to do things differently.
So, I talked about if we
find that the people who
are performing worse in their roles
are the ones who been there the longest.
Does that mean we should
rotate people around?
Does that mean people
are getting stale in their job?
Well, it could do.
But it could also be this kind of
Peter principle that I talked about.
That people who have been in the job for
a while have not been promoted out.
And so they're the lower performers.
The better performers are the ones
who get promoted out.
And so in that case, performance is
causing people to stay on a job longer,
rather than the other way around.
And similarly, if people tend to
send their best people to training,
then we're likely to see the higher
performers have more training.
That's not the training's improving the
performance, it's the other way around.
Okay, and so a lot of these times what
looks like an obvious inference about
what we should do, may not be if we really
understand the chain of events that's on
the line,
the patterns that we see on our data.
There are a variety of
ways of addressing this.
I think really, the basic question
always that you need to ask when you're
doing this, is what's leading to
difference in our main predictor variable?
Okay, we see in effect of posting,
why are some jobs posted and
other jobs are filled by sponsorship?
We see in effect of training,
who gets training?
We see in effect of time and
job, why do some people stay
longer in their jobs than others?
Without understanding what's
driving those things,
you want to be very cautious about making
kind of a strong argument that those
things are themselves causing performance
or whatever outcome variable you have.